System page description - TN108

Introduction

This document describes the contents of the system page under the
NewBrain paged memory operating system and also the fixed memory areas
used by the NewBrain in the non-paged operating system.

The system page is a page of RAM which normally resides in Slot 0. It
contains all the data structures necessary to system operation
including:

1. The Status Table.

2. The page Store, ie.e the number of pages currently resident.

3. The Region Table.

4. Access to operating system routines.

5. GETVIDEO.

Notation and nomenclature

OS - non-paged operating system.

POS - paged memory operating system.

Bn - bit number n where 0 is the least significant bit.

P - paged.

NP - non-paged.

MMS - memory management system.

IOS - input/output system (in OS).

PIOS - paged input/output system (in POS).

Object - a memory area allocated by the MMS.

COP - the COP 420 input/output microprocessor.

EIM - Expansion Interface Module

Page - an 8K area of the paged memory highway address space, all of
which is addressible by a single hardware page address.

Page number - a value which is used to access a unique page. This is
a two byte number of which B12-B15 are 0.

Slot - one of the eight 8K areas in the Z80 address space into which a
page may be brought in.

System page - a page which is usually in slot 0 containing
fundamental system information.

Slot n page number - A two byte number where B0-B11 are the page
number and B13-B15 are n. B12 is 0.

Location - the Z80 address which can be used to access an area of
memory when the page it is on has been placed in an appropriate
slot.

Region - a set of contiguous RAM pages used for a similar purpose as
allocated by the page allocator.

Video address - a location within the 32K of video RAM. B15 is
usually 1.

Stretched format - the bytes of a table entry are spaced 256 bytes
apart. The first bytes of consecutive entries are adjacent.

Not used - reserved for future expansion.

PARS

The PARS area exists between locations 0 and FF in both OS and
POS.

The System Parameters are held in the first 256 bytes of Slot Zero
Page (SZP) and in the area of RAM from 500H to 5FFH of the SZP
(MORPARS). The majority of the locations below 100H used in the
unpaged system are also used in the paged system with the same meaning
- in the case of any deviation from this, the locations are noted
below.

0 DI and 1- 3 TPON. NP contains the instructions DI, JP PONINT (an
address in the EF system ROM). P contains DI, JP 0. This is designed
for the use of NewBrains with power-down facility. POS does not
support this facility, and is not supported by the hardware in
models A and AD.

4 - 5 B3PRM. NP is the address of the start of the RAM available to
BASIC and is adjusted by OS as the IO buffer area increases and
decreases. P is available for use by the user program. BASIC sets it
to 2000H.

6 - 7 B4. NP is the address of the end of the RAM available to
BASIC. P is available for use by the user program. BASIC sets it to
C000H.

8 - A TRST8. Available for temporary use by any module. 8
contains C3 (JP) and must be preserved.

B DEV0. Contains the default console device number which may be
used by user programs when opening up a console.

C EXCESS. This is set to 24 and is only used in OS and should not be
changed.

D TV0. Cursor flash clock used by the frame interrupt handler.

E TV2. TV display status flags. NP B7 set means display screen, B6
means display cursor, B5 means cursor is underline not block, B4
means switch off video for next frame only, B3-B0 unused. P B7 set
means display cursor, B6 means cursor is underline not block, B5 means
switch off video for next frame only, B4-B0 any set will force video
to be switched off (at the moment B0 is used by the video device
drivers and B1 is used by the video memory allocator and the others
are unused).

F TV1. Contains the character at the cursor position.

10 - 12 TEXM. Restart for use by user program (used by BASIC). 10 is
set to C3 and should be preserved.

13 DEV2. Contains default backup storage device number for use of user
programs (e.g. BASIC when doing LOAD "program").

14 SAVE2. NP Temporary use by IOS. P Not used.

16 SAVE3. NP Temporary use by IOS. P not used.

18 - 1A TEXMNC. Restart for use by user program (used by BASIC). 18
is set to C3 and should be preserved.

1B PLLEN. Line length of stream 0 device (if not supported will be
0).

1C PHPOS. Print head position of stream 0 device (left hand side is
1). This is only operative if (PLLEN~=0).

1D PZLEN. Print zone length of stream 0 device. This is only
operative if (PLLEN~=0).

1E SAVE1. NP OS workspace. P not used.

20 - 22 TRST32. System call restart location.

23 BRKBUF. If this is non-zero all breaks (STOP key and * during
cassette lead-in read) will be ignored.

24 ENREGMAP. The last byte sent to enable register 1 (see hardware
definition).

25 IOPUC. Use count of open devices that require IOPOWER.

26 - 27 UP. Location of user program. NP this will usually be
BASIC. P this is the location of the main menu program which is always
a slot 6 location.

28 - 2A TRST40. System call on carry clear restart location.

2B KBMODE. This is used by KLOOK when performing keyboards decoding
and is used by all open device 0, 3 and 4 streams, which share a
common keyboard mode.

2C - 2D GSPR. NP Address of user program make space routine. P not
used.

2E - 2F RSPR. NP Address of user program return space routine. P not
used.

30 - 32 TRST48. Restart reserved for interrupt handling routines. 30
contains C3.

33 - BUFLG. B7 set means the paged operating system is in
operation. The other bits are unused except B0 in NP which is set by
IOS when buffers are being moved causing the video to be switched
off.

34 - 35 DPSP. Location of default console device open parameter
string.

36 - 37 DPSL. Length of default console device open parameter string.

38 - 3A TINT. Interrupt mode 1 interrupt handler. 38 must be kept as
C3.

3B COPCTL. Acknowledge byte sent to the COP immediately after the next
COP interrupt.

3C COPST. COP status. B7 unused, B6 set if keyboard data present in
COPBUFF that has not been read in, B5 set if no command is waiting
to be sent to the COP, B4 is set if a cassette error has occurred, B3
is set if * can cause a cassette break, B2 indicates status of break
key, B1 indicates a cassette break or battery low, B0 is 0.

3D COPBUFF. Contains keyboard and cassette data, and cassette error
numbers.

3E - 4D OUTBUFF. Data to be sent to single line display.

4E - 4F TIMBUFF. Not used.

50 - 51 CHKSUM. Tape checksum count.

52 - 55 CLOCK/CLACK. COP regular interrupt count. Used to seed random
number generator. Least significant byte is first.

56 - 57 STRTAB. NP address of IOS stream table. P not used.

58 - 59 DEVTAB. NP address of IOS device table. P not used.

5A - 5B TVCUR. NP address of cursor position. P video address of
cursor position.

5C - 5D TVRAM. NP address of IOS buffer of currently displayed screen.
P video address of currently displayed window of currently
displayed screen.

5E - 5F OTHER1. Unused but is updated by IOS in NP if points into a
moved buffer and by the video memory allocator in P if is a video
address in a video area that is moved.

60 - 61 OTHER2. Same as OTHER1.

62 - 63 IOSRAM. NP Address of base of IOS buffer area. P not used.

64 - 65 STRTOP. NP Address of end of IOS stream table. P not used.

66 - 68 TNMI. Non-maskable interrupt handler. 66 contains C3.

69 - 6B FICKLM. Frame interrupt count providing accurate 50 Hz clock.
Most significant byte is first.

6C - TBRP. Default transmit baud rate parameter. (Divide 19200 by the
value to give the baud rate). Optionally used by some device
drivers.

6D - RBRP. Default receive baud rate parameter. As TBRP.

6E - 70 IOPON. Increment IOPOWER use count routine.

71 - 73 IOPOFF. Decrement IOPOWER use count routine.

74 - 75 DEFNF. Default numerical output format. This value is a format
as required by the maths pack OUT routine.

76 STR11. Default high rsolution graphics stream number.

77 - 78 CHRROM. NP address/P slot 1 location of character
definition table used by high resolution graphics text routines.


The following are only used in the paged operating system:

79 - 7A DISCBUFFER. Location of disc command block in whichever slot
set it is supposed to be in. Location in Alternative Slot Set.

7B - 7D INTSERVICE. Non-COP interrupt handling routine (in
alternative slot set). Jump to interrupt server in Alternative Slot
Set.

7E - 80 GETOB. MMS object retrieval routine. (Memory fetch
routine.)

81 - 83 IGETOB. MMS object retrieval with index routine. (Memory
fetch routine.)

84 - 86 GETVIDEO. Video memory area retrieval routine. (Video memory
fetch routine.)

87 - 88 PARAMLEN. Temporary workspace by PIOS; length of string
in PARAMAREA. 89 - 8A IOSTEMP. Temporary workspace by PIOS.

8B - 9A S0,S1,S2,S3,S4,S5,S6,S7. Sn contains the slot n page number of
the page currently in slot n.

9B - 9E ENDOFOBJECTS. Used by MMS to mark the real address of the
end of the last object relative to the beginning of the region.

9F - A0 VIDEOTOP. Page number of end of video RAM pages. Used by video
RAM allocator.

A1 - A2 VIDEOBASE. Page number of first video page. Used by video
RAM allocator.

A3 - A4 AVIDEOTOP. Address of the end of the last used video area
relative to the beginning of the video area.

A5 - A6 UPPAGE. Slot 6 page number of page containing the main
menu program. [Page-number of low-level user program.]

A7 TV3. Contains the byte to be sent to the TV control register (see
hardware definition) for the current screen display.

A8 - A9 ESYSPAGE. Location in system page of first unused byte.
[Address of end of SZP contents.]

AA - AC DISC. Disc operation activation routine. Jump to disk
controller routine.

AD OLDOS. Identifys the version of the non-paged operating system. 0
means 1.4, 1 means 1.9, 2 means 1.91, 3 means 1.9 FRENCH, 4 means
2.0.

AE - AF CHRPAGE. Slot 1 page number of page containing the
character definitions used by the high resolution graphics text
routines.

B0 - B1 INABROM. Slot 5 page number of internal AB ROM.

B2 - B3 INCDROM. Slot 6 page number of internal CD ROM.

B4 - B5 INEFROM. Slot 7 page number of internal EF ROM.

B6 ENREG2MAP. Image for second enable register.

B7 INTFLGS. Flags for expansion ACIA and interrupt buffer structure.

B8 - B9 PHEAD. Pointer to first object in serial memory chain.

BA TV4. Contains video area number of currently displayed screen.

BB - BC PUSER. Number of region 0 pages that are required.

BD A16COUNT. Contains use count of alternative slot set. [Count of
depth of entry into Alternative Slot Set.]

BE - C0 ENTERLIBRARY. Routine to enter external library routines.

C1 - C3 GETBUFFER. Buffer memory fetch routine.

C4 - C6 INTBUFFER. Buffer memory fetch routine.

C7 - D6 BOXTAB. User counts, BCR image, and CTC images for each of
four Network Modules.

D7 - D9 SERVECOPINT. COP interrupt service routine.

Stores for the buffer manager and the special get buffer routine
to communicate with each other

DA - LOWBUFFERPAGE.

DB - HIGHBUFFERPAGE.

DC - BUFMARGIN.

DE - E0 V2INTBUFFER.

E1 - E3 DISCSTATUS. Routine to return status of disc operations

E4 - ECTCCOUNT. Count of users of EIM CTC.

E5 - ECTC1. Image for EIM CTC1.

E6 - ECTC2. Image for EIM CTC2.

E7 - ECTC3. Image for EIM CTC3.

E8 - ALPDATA. Stored data from EIM ACIA on LP channel.

E9 - AV24DATA. Stored data from EIM ACIA on V24 channel.

EA - NBTALLY. Table of flags for Network Module ACIAs in use.

EE - Unused (at present).

The rest of the non-paged system fixed areas

100 - 19F FPRAM. Used by the maths pack as workspace.

1A0 - 267 STKRAM. Used as the hardware stack.


The rest of the paged system fixed areas

100 - 19F FPRAM. Used by the maths pack as workspace.

1A0 - 4FF STKRAM. Used as the hardware stack.

500 - 519 WORKAREA. 20-byte scratch-pad available for short-term
use by system functions.

520 - 5FF MORPARS. Expansion to PARS area initialised to 0. Unused
(at present).

600 - 6FF STATUSTABLE.

The n'th byte of the table is owned by the device driver and any
associated interrupt handling routine currently connected to stream n,
and is called the "status word" for stream n. It may be peeked by
anything, but only altered by its owners. The status word is set to
zero on system initialisation and whenever its owner is closed, if its
owner supports the status word. (We say that a device "supports the
status word" if it might alter it). The status word for stream n will
have value zero if stream n is not open or if stream n does nor
support the status word or if the value of its bits happen to be zero.
The meaning of the bits are as follows:

bit/mnemonic/meaning if set

0 IEST Input error status: the next call to input from this
stream will produce an error in accordance with the
usual behaviour of the device connected.

1 OEST Output error status: the next call to output to this
stream will produce an error in accordance with the
usual behaviour to the device connected.

2 NRIST Not ready for input: the next call to input from this
stream may result in a long wait, or if the device is
the sort which has returns immediately and has a
conventional return for "no data returned" then this
return will occur.

3 NROST Not ready for input: the next call to input from this
stream may result in a long wait, or a loss of data.


4 EOFST End-of-file: the next input from this stream will
result in a read past end-of-file error.

5, 6, 7 Reserved for expansion.

Note that a meaning is systemically attached to a status word bit
only if the bit is set - the precise interpretation will depend on
the device: for example, an error may still occur on reading even
if IEST is not set. This also means that some devices might only
partially support a status word: for example, unless there are other
compelling reasons it is not necessary to assume that a device
opened for input only, which would produce an error if an attempt were
made to output to it, should keep OEST set. 

700 - AFF TABLEZERO. This
is the base table of the MMS data structure, which contains the real
addresses of the secondary tables. See MMS documentation for details.

B00 - CFF STREAMTABLE. The entries are in streched format. An
entry of 0 indicates the stream is not open. Otherwise the entry
contains the object number of the buffer object. The first byte of
this contains the device number, the second contains the port number
and the rest of the object is the own memory area.

D00 - DFF PARAMAREA. This is an area used as workspace by PIOS and
FINDLIBRARY.

E00 - 11FF PDEVTAB. This is the table of device drivers, which is in
streched format. The first two bytes of each entry give the slot 4
page number of the device driver and the second two bytes give its
location.

1200 - 15FF ZPTABLE. This is the table of system routines, which is in
streched format. The first two bytes of each entry give the slot 7
page number of the device driver and the second bytes give its
location.

1600 - 167F VIDTABLE. This gives the video addresses and lengths of
the 32 possible video areas. The first two bytes of each entry
contains the video address and the second two contain the length. All
video areas are multiples of 128 in size.

1680 - 169F ENTRYAVAILABLETABLE. This is a bit map table auxiliary to
MMS. The bits are ordered with B0 of the bytes being for 0 to 31, B1
being for 32 to 63 etc. If a bit is a one it means that the secondary
MMS table it corresponds to exists and has a free entry. See MMS
documentation.

16A0 - 1701 REGIONTABLE. Each region has a six byte entry. The
first two bytes correspond to the first page belonging to the
region. The second two are the slot 4 page number of the region
manager (if the most significant byte is 0 it means there is none),
and the third two are the location of the region manager. The last two
bytes of REGIONTABLE (REGTOP) are a dummy entry to mark the end of
region 16.

1702 - (ESYSPAGE)-1 SLOTZEROCODE. This area contains various important
system routines. If it is required to put in a new one then put it in
at (ESYSPAGE) and increment (ESYSPAGE past it).

MJC 110783, CSP 260483
